# Auto Insurance Machine Learning Project
This project analyses an insurance claims dataset to use machine learning algorithms to detect fraudulent claims and to predict total claim costs. This project involves data processing, statistical analysis, and modelling to identify key drivers of fraud and claims. 

## Data Processing
The dataset consists of insurance claims records, including policy, incident and client details, and claim outcome information. The data processing involved handling missing values, checking feature cardinality, standardising entries, removing unnecessary columns and finally encoding categorial variables. An analysis of numerical and categorical features was conducted to examine distributions, detect outliers, and inspect relationships using correlations and hypothesis tests. 

Dataset link: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/buntyshah/auto-insurance-claims-data

## Methodology
For fraud detection, three classification models were developed (Logistic Regression, Random Forest, and Gradient Boosting) and evaluated using confusion matrices, classification reports, and ROC-AUC. For claim prediction, three regression models were trained (Linear Regression, Random Forest, and Gradient Boosting) and evaluated based on RMSE, MAE, and $R^{2}$. Hyperparameter tuning was applied in both cases to optimise model performance, with threshold adjustments for the classification models. 

## Results
The classification models performed similarly in terms of recall, achieving the same score of $73\%$. Differences are observed in the false positive rates, with Random Forest performing the best at $13\%$, followed by Logistic Regression ($15\%$), and Gradient Boosting ($17\%$). Across all models, the `capital_loss` feature was consistently the most important predictor, with the importance of the remaining features varying per model. Overall, the best performing model was Random Forest. 

The regression models also achieved similar results, with $R^{2}$ for each model values ranging from $0.71$ to $0.725$. The models can capture variation in the claim amounts, but looking at the RMSE, the claim predictions are not close to the original value. In the data, the claims are separated into two clusters of high and low claims, which the models can distinguish between quite well, which explains the $R^{2}$ results. Each model is off by around $14000$ on average, with the predictions regressing towards the mean of the clusters. Overall, Gradient Boosting performed the best, although the other models are very close in metrics. Feature importance revealed that `authorities_contacted_Police` was the most influential feature across each model, with the other `authorities_contacted` subfeatures being close by in Linear Regression and Random Forest. For future improvement of these models, splitting the claims data into high and low clusters and training two distinct models should result in a better understanding of the patterns and lead to more accurate predictions.
